INSERT INTO `Courses` (`Source`, `Code`, `Nickname`, `Title`, `Instructors`, `Credits`, `Hours`, `Corequisites`, `Prerequisites`, `Offered`, `Description`) VALUES 
('Olin 07-08','MTH 1110','Calculus','ICB 1 Math: Calculus','Geddes, Tilley','2 MTH','2-0-4','SCI 1110 and ENG1110','','Fall','An overview of differential and integral calculus in the context of elementary numerical analysis. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 1110','Physics: Mech','ICB 1 Physics: Mechanics','Christianson, Holt','3 SCI','3-0-6','MTH 1110 and ENG 1110','','Fall','This course provides a thorough introduction to classical mechanics. We will cover kinematics, the basis of Newton\'s laws, particle dynamics, the concepts of momentum, work, energy, and rotational motion, and oscillations. Additionally, the course will establish the basics of solid and fluid mechanics, concluding with introductory topics in thermodynamics. Our goal is to share with you the excitement of discovering the material universe at its most basic levels and to equip you with the basic knowledge and analytical skills necessary to become a scientist or an engineer. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 1110','ECS','ICB 1 Engineering: Modeling and Control of Compartment Systems','G. Pratt, Storey','3 ENGR','3-3-3','MTH 1110 and SCI 1110','','Fall','A hands-on class in the modeling and control of compartment systems, including first and second order thermal, mechanical, and electrical systems, the nature of effort and flow (across and through state variables) as universal concepts, power and energy, impedance, damping, passivity, qualitative feedback  stability, and hysteretic, P, PI, and PID control. Students will also learn to use MATLAB, to use Simulink, and to write basic real-time control and simulation software. Integrated Course Block (ICB) 2: '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 1120','Vector Calc','ICB 2 Math: Vector Calculus','TBA','2 MTH','2-0-4','SCI 1120 and ENG 1120','','Spring','An overview of differential and integral calculus in higher dimensions. Topics include surfaces, partial differentiation, gradients, multiple integrals, line integrals, Green\'s, Divergence, and Stokes\' theorems, and their applications to science and engineering. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 1120','Physics: E+M','ICB 2 Physics: Electromagnetism and Waves','Christianson, Zastavker','3 SCI','3-0-6','MTH 1120 and ENG 1120','','Spring','Electricity and magnetism, including electric charges, forces, and fields, Gauss\'s Law, potential, electrostatic energy and capacitors, magnetic fields and energy, mutual and self induction, Ampere\'s Law, Maxwell\'s Equations, acoustic and electromagnetic waves, polarization, interference and diffraction. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 1120','EDS','ICB 2 Engineering: Modeling and Control of Spatially Distributed Systems','G. Pratt, Storey','3 ENGR','3-3-3','MTH 1120 and SCI 1120','','Spring','A hands-on class in the modeling and control of spatially distributed systems, including thermal diffusion in 1D and 2D, the heat equation, the wave equation, characteristic impedance and wave velocity, simple (Cartesian grid) finite difference analysis, acoustic transmission lines, electrical transmission lines, termination and wave reflection. Arts, Humanities, Social Science, and Entrepreneurship '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 0112','OCO','The Olin Conductorless Orchestra','Dabby','1 AHS','2-0-1','','Audition','Fall, Spring','The Olin Conductorless Orchestra (OCO) &mdash; an ensemble, minus conductor &mdash; features instrumentalists in leadership and collaborative roles. Dedicated to orchestral performance in the concerted spirit of chamber music, the orchestra forges individual participation, active listening, and group-motivation into performances that have established it as the only conductorless orchestra of its kind at an American college. (A student can apply up to 4 OCO credits to the 28 required credits in AHSE, or can petition to apply up to 4 OCO credits to the AHS concentration. Any additional credits, i.e., more than 4, earned by a student enrolling in OCO will show up as additional AHS credits, but will not count toward satisfying the requisite 28 credits in AHSE.) '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 1100','History of Tech','History of Technology: A Cultural and Contextual Approach','Martello','4 AHS','4-0-8','','','Fall','This course operates on three levels of inquiry and exploration. In the most detailed sense, we look at several major History of Technology themes, such as Technological Systems, Technology and Culture, and Technology and the Environment. We address larger historical questions, such as the interpretation of evidence and the combination of analysis and narrative. Finally, we conduct writing, presentation, creativity, and analysis exercises that contribute to competencies such as communication and contextual understanding. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 1122','Wired Ensemble','The Wired Ensemble: Instruments, Voices, Players','Dabby','4 AHS','4-0-8','','Ability to read music','Fall','Two concurrent streams comprise The Wired Ensemble: &bull;	composition and performance of original works for instruments and voices &bull;	exploration of music through written and oral communication. As composers and performers, students concentrate on instruments, voices, and the symbolic language that brings them to life. They compose music for every family of instruments (woodwinds, brass, strings, percussion), as well as voice and spoken word. The course features semiweekly performances of original compositions by fellow musicians. Students also have the opportunity to hear their works performed in concert settings by professional and student musicians with whom they have collaborated. Seminar trips to Boston and New York enable the class to gather musical and inspirational material, in addition to hearing some of the finest orchestral and vocal ensembles in performance. While actively engaged in composition and performance &mdash; all geared to an end-of-term production &mdash; students examine the worlds of earlier composers in order to provide context for their own lives and work. Prerequisite: ability to read music. The Wired Ensemble is sponsored by Toscanini\'s Ice Cream. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 1130','Seeing + Hearing','Seeing and Hearing: Communicating with Photographs, Video and Sound','Donis-Keller','4 AHS','4-0-8','','','Fall','Seeing and Hearing is a foundation course that is about the communication of ideas developed by research, reflection, and evolving thought, using as a vehicle for expression contemporary digital media tools. In this project-based course, students will have opportunities for hands-on learning in audio recording and editing, photography and printing, and video recording and editing. Science and engineering content are integrated in order to provide a reasonably comprehensive understanding of the devices we use to gather sound and images and in order to understand more fully the properties of seeing and hearing. A major goal is to enlarge our awareness of the environment we inhabit and to respond to the perceived environment by producing original visual and sonic artwork. Students will complete projects including a self-portrait, a sound-piece that is used as an audio track for a short video, a video documentary, and a staged narrative. Our process is to share work through discussion sessions as we follow projects from their initial stages to completion and final presentation. Additional context for Seeing and Hearing is provided by selected readings, visits by guest lecturers, additional faculty and staff participation and by viewing work of other professional practitioners. This course does not require prior experience with image/sound gathering or editing. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 1140','Culture + Difference','Culture and Difference: An Anthropological Approach','Lynch','4 AHS','4-0-8','','','Fall','This course introduces students to key concepts and methods in cultural anthropology. Cultural anthropology is the study of how humans organize their lives as members of society, and the ways in which they make these lives meaningful. Through readings on such diverse topics as adolescence in Samoa, epilepsy among Hmong-Americans, and McDonald\'s in Hong Kong, this course will explore contemporary anthropological approaches to three central questions: 1) What is culture? 2) Does &ldquo;culture&rdquo; explain why people do what they do and believe what they believe? 3) What fate and value do cultural differences have in today\'s interconnected world? '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 1150','What Is I?','What is I?','Stein','4 AHS','4-0-8','','','Fall (not offered every year)','This interdisciplinary exploration of identity draws on a diverse range of genres in the Humanities, Social Sciences, Arts and Sciences. Prior offerings have drawn from Anthropology, Artificial Intelligence, Biology, Film, History, Literature, Memoir, Neuroscience, Philosophy, Psychology, Political Science, Science Fiction, Sociology, and Visual Arts. Our goal is to understand how individual perspective (or the illusion of same) comes into being and how our own unique perspectives shape the way that we see the world. Emphasis is placed on communication and context. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 1500','FBE','Foundations of Business and Entrepreneurship','Bourne, Schiffman','4 AHSE','4-0-8','','','Fall, Spring','The course is designed to provide Olin students with experience in planning and growing a business venture. The learning experience is centered on &ldquo;doing&rdquo; (e.g., engaging in a business simulation) while building a student\'s competence in the functional areas of business including accounting, finance, marketing, and strategy. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 2110','MatSci: Stuff','The Stuff of History: Materials and Culture in Ancient, Revolutionary and Contemporary Times','Martello','4 AHS','4-0-8','SCI 1410 Section 2','','Spring','The lion\'s share of our history of technology course features a series of readings, lectures, and discussions on the relationship between materials, science, society, and the environment in three historical periods. We start with the material practices and paradigms of Copper and Bronze Age societies, shift to Paul Revere\'s &ldquo;Revolutionary&rdquo; work with various metals and fabrication processes, and conclude with a look at the technologies and challenges of tomorrow. We will emphasize the development of three skills that are vital to our studies: contextual thinking, communication (both written and oral), and historical research methods pertaining to source evaluation and narrative construction. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 2112','Six Books','Six Books that Changed the World','Martello','2 AHS','4-0-8','AHS Foundation','','Spring ','Why and how do certain books reshape the course of human history? In this course, we will explore six books, selected from different times, societies, and genres, that have had an unquestionably major impact upon the world in which we live. Class meetings will alternate between contextual studies of the historical context of each book (including the author\'s background, the political and social setting, and other factors) and careful analyses of the works themselves. Our discussions will investigate each book\'s contemporary and modern impact while also exploring the qualities that caused all of our selections to have such an enduring and global effect. Students will be expected to contribute to class discussions, make presentations, and write a report on an additional book of their choosing. NOTE: this course will be offered during the first half of the spring semester, will meet twice a week, and will require approximately 12 hours of student effort each week. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 2114','SciFi','Science Fiction and Historical Context','Martello','2 AHS','4-0-8','AHS Foundation','','Spring','Science fiction is a wonderful genre that somehow captures a society\'s ideals, fears, assumptions, and major challenges. In the same way that a historian attempts to piece together complex cause-effect chains to make sense of the past, science fiction writers project the values, technologies, and beliefs of their own societies into alternate or future realities. Our class will work together to understand the conventions of science fiction and explore science fiction works (books, short stories, film) produced in different times, across various cultures, and in different sub-genres of this field. Students will have the opportunity to analyze different works of science fiction through writings and class discussions, and can also choose to develop a science fiction idea of their own. NOTE: this course will be offered during the second half of the spring semester, will meet twice a week, and will require approximately 12 hours of student effort each week. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 2120','Heroes','Heroes for the Renaissance Engineer: Leonardo, Nabokov, Bach, Borodin','Dabby','4 AHS','3-0-9','','','Alt Spring (odd years)','To what extent have artists exhibited extraordinary knowledge and ability in science? Does this necessarily infuse their art, and if so, how? Source documents provide the key focus for analysis and critical thought. Artists in the fields of literature, art, and music include Vladimir Nabokov (writer and lepidopterist), Leonardo da Vinci (artist and engineer), Alexander Borodin (composer and chemist), and J. S. Bach (composer, performer, and acoustician). Each of these achieved a self-sufficiency enabling the articulation and realization of work that reveals a singular vision, shaped in part by fluency in both technical and artistic disciplines. Class trips to concerts and museums in Boston and New York enable students to explore firsthand the works of these individuals. Students also have the opportunity to realize projects that meld the arts and sciences in order to experience firsthand the satisfaction and challenges faced by Bach, Borodin, Nabokov, and Leonardo in their desire for knowledge, discovery, and creative expression.  '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 2130','Art + Science','The Intersection of Art and Science','Donis-Keller','4 AHS','4-0-8','','','Alt Fall (even years)','Science and Art are often considered entirely different worlds inhabited by practitioners who have nothing in common. In this course, we will debunk this myth by closely examining the discovery process in both disciplines and by comparing the culture of science to that of art, historically and in the present. We will consider the influence of scientific discoveries, from optics to &ldquo;new media&rdquo; on the production of art and discuss the corollary question &ldquo;Has art influenced the progress of science?&rdquo; We will also consider ways in which science allows us to understand artists and the work they create. In contemporary society, artists have begun to comment on science, sometimes with disastrous results, which leads us to ask, &ldquo;What is needed in order to establish a meaningful dialogue between scientists and artists, and, does it matter?&rdquo; '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 2131','Drawing + Thinking','Responsive Drawing and Visual Thinking','Donis-Keller','4 AHS','4-0-8','','','Fall','The course assumes no prior experience in drawing. Students will learn to visualize objects in three-dimensional space and commit them to the two-dimensional space of a page, gaining critical experience with &ldquo;idea sketching,&rdquo; an ability that can be put to many uses in future courses (e.g. project design). Students will also draw subjects from life, i.e. stationary objects and life models using media including charcoal, graphite, cont&eacute;, and ink. The emphasis will be realistic depiction as compared to non-objective abstraction. Students will begin with basic exercises in drawing and rapidly move to more complex intensive drawing experiences. Approximately one-third of the classroom time will be used for drawing from a life model. Class discussion and sketchbook homework assignments will be an essential element in the learning process. Homework assignments will include drawing and visual thinking exercises to be completed in personal sketchbooks. Reading selected text material is also part of the homework requirement. Several invited speakers will contribute to the course and provide informal critiques of student work. One field trip is planned to the Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University in Cambridge to view art. Other in-class activities will include participation in discussion of drawings (old master and contemporary) that are presented to illustrate various objectives of classroom work (e.g. use of line to indicate form) and group critique sessions. Assessment will be based on weekly homework assignments, classroom work, and three drawing projects to be completed outside of class. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 2140','Anthropology','Anthropology: Culture, Knowledge and Creativity','Lynch','4 AHS','4-0-8','','AHS Foundation','Spring','Anthropological theories and methods help us understand human behavior and values. Broadly speaking, anthropologists ask, &ldquo;Why do people do what they do and believe what they believe?&rdquo; Today, anthropologists study a wide range of contemporary social issues, such as international development, garment manufacturing, the production of scientific knowledge, female &ldquo;circumcision,&rdquo; and intellectual property. In this course, we will read about, debate, and discuss these and other issues in order to probe into the meanings of culture, knowledge, and creativity. &bull;	What do anthropologists mean by culture? &bull;	What does it mean to take cultural difference seriously? &bull;	Does culture have an influence on what is considered legitimate &ldquo;knowledge&rdquo;? &bull;	If knowledge is &ldquo;situated,&rdquo; what happens when one form of knowledge comes in contact with another (for instance in discussions of global human rights)? &bull;	What is the relationship between cultural difference, situated knowledge, and human creativity? &bull;	Does globalization threaten to destroy creativity, stifle innovation, and erase difference? After we learn how anthropologists deal with these questions at a range of research sites, we will end the course with our own anthropological studies that utilize what we have learned earlier in the course. Students will conduct short research projects that examine social issues pertaining to the use of the Internet in the United States. By ending with a study of ourselves, students will see how creative we really are; that we, too, have culture; and that what we consider legitimate knowledge is culturally situated. The professor will assume no prior knowledge of anthropology. Skills to be developed include critical reading, critical thinking, writing and analysis, presenting arguments in oral and visual form, and working on projects in small groups. The following texts will be used, among others: Jean Davison, Voices from Mutira: Change in the Lives of Gikuyu Women, Daniel Miller and Don Slater, The Internet: An Ethnographic Approach, Jeremy MacClancy, Exotic No More: Anthropology on the Front Lines. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 3130','Photography','Advanced Digital Photography','Donis-Keller','4 AHS','4-0-8','','AHSE 1130 or Permission of the Instructor','Alt Fall (odd years)','In this course, students will develop a personal photographic vision and become acquainted with the work of leading contemporary photographers. A critical awareness of the medium of photography and the history of the still photographic image will also be fostered through selected readings, discussions, and visits to galleries and museums. While communication with visual images is paramount, technical issues will be addressed in some depth. For example, there will be instruction and practice with color management methods, advanced Adobe Photoshop, basic bookbinding methods, and lighting techniques. Regular assignments and group critiques will help monitor progress and inspire new directions. The culminating project will be the design and construction of an artist\'s book by each member of the class. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 4190','AHS Capstone','Arts, Humanities, Social Science (AHS) Capstone','AHS Staff','4 AHS','4-0-8','','Permission of the Instructor(s)','Fall, Spring','The AHS Capstone is an advanced, self-designed AHS project that builds upon a student\'s prior experience in one or more AHS disciplines. All students must complete either an AHS Capstone or an Entrepreneurship Capstone in order to graduate. AHS Capstones must be proposed to the AHS Committee and approved by the end of the academic year prior to the Capstone except in extenuating circumstances. Additional information on the AHS Capstone is available at http://projects.olin.edu/ahs. AHS Capstone students will complete a proposal, a journal, a disciplinary deliverable, an analysis of their deliverable, and a presentation. Class sessions will vary between &ldquo;plenary&rdquo; meetings of all students and faculty, small group workshops, and individual meetings. Please contact the AHS Committee at ahs@lists.olin.edu with any questions. '),
('Olin 07-08','AHSE 4590','E! Capstone','Entrepreneurship Capstone','Bourne, Schiffman','4 AHSE','2-0-10','','Permission of the Instructor(s)','Fall, Spring','The Entrepreneurship Capstone is an advanced, self-designed project that builds upon a student\'s prior experience in business and entrepreneurship. All students must complete either an AHS Capstone or an Entrepreneurship Capstone in order to graduate. Entrepreneurship Capstones must be proposed to the Entrepreneurship Committee and approved by the end of the academic year prior to the Capstone except in extenuating circumstances. Normally, an Entrepreneurship Capstone student will engage in a team or individual project to build and/or execute a plan to bring a new organization, product or service into being. For this reason, a course on Entrepreneurship and New Ventures is normally expected as a prerequisite to enrolling in the Entrepreneurship Capstone. Courses that satisfy this prerequisite include Babson\'s EPS3501 or EPS3501T and Olin\'s AHSE 3599 Special Topics in Business and Entrepreneurship: Technology and New Ventures. If you are planning to enroll in the Entrepreneurship Capstone, and have not yet completed this prerequisite, it is strongly suggested you enroll in AHSE 3599. Class sessions for the Entrepreneurship Capstone will consist of seminar-style &ldquo;plenary&rdquo; sessions as well as other pedagogical modalities as appropriate. If choosing the Entrepreneurship Capstone track, a student must also complete 8 additional depth credits in business or entrepreneurship. The New Ventures course counts for 4 of those credits. Please contact Steve Schiffman with any questions. Engineering '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 1200','Design Nature','Design Nature','Eris, Linder, Staff','4 ENGR','6-4-2','','','Fall','We take nature, an important source of inspiration and understanding, as a theme and develop bioinspired ideas into functional prototypes. Our focus is on the general principles and methods that shape the practice of engineering design. Students complete individual and team projects in a studio environment where we seek to develop a shared practice and understanding of engineering design. Students also gain experience in visualization, experimentation, estimation, fabrication, and presentation as they relate to designing. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 1510','IntroProg','Introductory Programming','Downey','2 ENGR','2-1-1','','','Fall','This class is an introduction to basic programming intended for students with little or no programming experience. It develops basic programming and debugging skills, and covers concepts including variables and values; procedures, parameters and arguments; lists, dictionaries and other collections; and basic algorithms including map, filter and reduce. Students completing this class successfully will be well-prepared for Software Design. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 2210','PoE','Principles of Engineering','Minch, Mur-Miranda','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ENGR 1120','Fall, Spring','Through a significant project experience, students will learn to integrate analysis, qualitative design, quantitative optimization, experiments, and simulations to improve their ability to engineer real systems. In each section of the course, students will work in small multidisciplinary teams to design and to build a mechatronic system of their own choosing. Each project must include both a nontrivial mechanical system design and a nontrivial electronic system design involving both hardware and software components. Projects will be subject to realistic materials, process, and budgetary constraints. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 2250','UOCD','User Oriented Collaborative Design','Eris, Linder, Staff','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','','Spring','Students develop detailed concepts and models of authentic new products and services. Our focus is on user-oriented, collaborative approaches to design and seeking holistic solutions integrating user and functional perspectives. We emphasize the importance of process and the development of strategies. Students observe and engage people to develop a deep understanding of their values and the patterns of their lives. They work collaboratively in a studio environment to create a shared understanding of the people they design for (and with) and the product ideas they develop. Topics covered include design thinking, ethnographic methods, concept development and interaction design. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 2410','SigSys','Signals and Systems','Dabby, Yim','4 ENGR','2-2-8','','','Spring','Signals (functions of one or more independent variables) and Systems (devices that perform operations on signals) presents fundamental concepts that arise in a variety of fields. The ideas and techniques associated with these concepts inform such diverse disciplines as biomedical engineering, acoustics, communications, aeronautics and astronautics, circuit design, and the arts, humanities, and social sciences. Topics include transforms (Z, Laplace, Fourier), frequency analysis, convolution, FIR and IIR systems, stability, generalized functions, modulation (AM and FM), sampling, and digital filtering. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 2420','Circuits','Introduction to Microelectronic Circuits','Minch','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ENGR 1120','Spring','This course will cover elements of linear circuits, such as the operation of basic circuit elements, fundamental circuit laws, and analytic techniques in both the time domain and the frequency domain. It will also cover the transistor-level design of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) electronic circuits in the context of modern integrated-circuit technology. The course will include an introduction to the fabrication and operation of metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) transistors and to the design and operation of the basic building blocks of analog integrated circuits including single-transistor amplifier stages, current mirrors, cascodes, differential pairs, and single-stage operational amplifiers. Throughout the course, an emphasis will be placed on design-oriented circuit analysis techniques and developing circuit reasoning skills. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 2510','Software Design','Software Design','Downey, Stein','4 ENGR','5-0-7','','','Fall, Spring','This course is an introduction to software design. This course focuses on a model of computation as a set of simultaneous ongoing entities embedded in and interacting with a dynamic environment, for example: computation as it occurs in spreadsheets, video games, web applications, and robots. A major component of the class is a weekly three-hour, in-class laboratory. Much of this laboratory is spent in collaborative work on program development, with an emphasis on student-student interaction and student-student teaching, facilitated and enriched by the course staff. In addition, design and implementation work is supplemented with observational laboratory assignments, inviting students to consider not only how to build a program, but how to anticipate its behavior and how to modify that behavior. Both students with no prior background and students with background comparable to the CS AP should both find this course interesting and worthwhile. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3210','Sustainable','Sustainable Design','Linder','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','ENGR 2250','Fall','This course provides a comprehensive overview of sustainable product design. Emphasis is placed on learning and using green design principles, methods, tools and materials. Examples include life cycle assess-ment, eco-efficiency and eco-effectiveness. A system perspective highlighting material and energy flows over the complete product life cycle is used to structure course material. Students complete substantial reading, investigate existing products and develop their own product ideas. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3220','HFID','Human Factors and Interface Design','Stein','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ENGR 2250 User Oriented Collaborative Design (required); ENGR 2510 Software Design or other software development experience (recommended)','Fall, Spring','A hands-on exploration of the design and development of user interfaces, taking into account the realities of human perception and behavior, the needs of users, and the pragmatics of computational infrastructure and application. Focuses on understanding and applying the lessons of human interaction to the design of usable computer applications; will also look at lessons to be learned from less usable systems. This course will mix studio (open project working time) and seminar (readings and discussion) formats. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3230','Usable Products','Usable Products: Analyzing the User Experience for Redesign','Eris','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ENGR 2250','Spring','What makes products usable? How can products be designed for usability? Students develop an in-depth understanding of product-user interactions by redesigning product concepts they have developed prior to taking the course for better usability. They identify the user requirements that drove the development of their product concepts, treat those requirements as hypotheses for a series of user experiments, and redesign their product concepts based on experimental findings. Video interaction and protocol analyses are introduced as research methodologies. Fundamental usability theories are covered. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3310','Transport','Transport Phenomena','Storey, Townsend','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','ICB2','Fall','This course introduces the basic physics and applications of the transport of heat, mass, and momentum. Topics in fluid dynamics include kinematics, conservation laws, dynamic similarity, and laminar flow solutions. Topics in heat and mass transfer include internal and external convection, free convection, boiling and condensation, and the analogy between heat and mass transport. Applications in aerodynamics, geophysical flows, manufacturing processes, and biological systems will be discussed. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3320','MechSolids','Mechanics of Solids and Structures','Lee','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ICB1','Spring','This course covers the principles of statics of structures and mechanics of materials. Topics include tension, compression, shear, torsion, bending, stresses, deflection, and strain in loaded members. Students will use a combination of analysis and simulation to understand the principles of mechanics. The course includes applications in structural engineering and machine elements. Students are introduced to the use of finite element methods as a tool for design and analysis. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3330','MechDesign','Mechanical Design','Barrett','4 ENGR','4-4-4','ENGR 3320','ICB2','Fall, Spring','This design course introduces new topics in machine design and applies and integrates the basic mechanical and thermal engineering sciences. Topics in machine element design include stress, strain, deflection, stiffness, and failure of mechanical components, steady and variable loading, mechanical fastening and joining, and the design of mechanical components, including springs, bearings, gears, shafts, and axles. The course includes a major design component that involves the fabrication and physical testing of mechanical components. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3335','Vibrations','Mechanical Vibrations','Lee','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','MTH 2120, MTH 2140','Fall','This course is an intermediate treatment of the dynamics of elastic bodies. The following topics are covered: derivation of equations of motion of rigid/elastic bodies using Newton/ Euler; Lagrangian, and Hamilton\'s Principle formulations; linearization and stability analysis; time and frequency domain techniques for free and forced vibration of conservative and non-conservative single and multi-degree-of-freedom systems; vibration of simple continuous systems; introduction to concepts in random and nonlinear vibrations. Applications are drawn from areas ranging from structures to microdevices. Course assignments and projects include hands-on vibration measurements and computational simulation. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3340','Dynamics','Dynamics','Bingham','4 ENGR','4-4-4','MTH 2140','ICB1','Fall','This course contains the analytical and conceptual tools for understanding how mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical systems undergo changes in state. To analyze such systems we will apply both momentum and variational principles to derive the equations of motion. Hands-on demonstrations will illustrate the concepts behind these fundamental tools, and students will work on real-world examples from robotics, vehicle systems, spacecraft, and intelligent-structures. Building on the ability to derive the equations of motion for rigid bodies, we extend the analysis to lumped parameter and continuous systems. This course will deliver generic tools for characterizing linear and nonlinear system behavior in the time and frequency domains. The hands-on component of the course will explore the fundamental concepts of system dynamics: system modes (eigenvalues and vectors), spectrum analysis, and time response. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3350','Thermo','Thermodynamics','Storey, Townsend','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','','Spring','This course covers the fundamental principles of thermodynamics and physical chemistry as applied to engineering systems. This course provides a foundation in fundamental thermodynamic phenomena, including the first and second laws of thermodynamics, thermodynamic properties, equations of state in real and ideal gases, and chemical equilibrium. The basic laws are used to understand and analyze the performance and efficiency of systems, such as automobile engines, gas turbines, steam power plants, and refrigerators. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3355','Renewable','Renewable Energy','Townsend','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','ENGR 3350','Fall','Modern society relies on stable, readily available energy supplies. Renewable energy is an increasingly important component of the new energy mix. The course covers energy conversion, utilization and storage for renewable technologies such as wind, solar, biomass, fuel cells and hybrid systems and for more conventional fossil fuel-based technologies. Thermodynamics concepts (including the first and second law) will form the basis for modeling the renewable energy systems. The course also touches upon the environmental consequences of energy conversion and how renewable energy can reduce air pollution and global climate change. Transport Phenomena is recommended as a co-requisite, but not required. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3360','Fluid Dynamics','Topics in Fluid Dynamics','Storey','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','ENGR 3310','Spring','This course will build upon the fundamentals learned in ENGR 3310 (Transport Phenomena) and discuss modern applications of fluid dynamics. The theme for the course will be advertised during course registration and will vary from year to year. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3370','Controls','Controls','Bingham','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','ENGR 2410 or ENGR 3340','Spring','This course explores the techniques for changing the dynamics of a system using feedback control. The first portion of the course covers methods for analyzing the open-loop dynamics of generic systems in the frequency-domain (transfer functions) and time-domain (state-space equations). Then we will develop feedback techniques for shaping the system response. Students completing this course will have the analytical tools for controller design (both classical and modern) as well as a fundamental understanding of the concepts behind feedback control (stability, performance, controllability, observability, etc.). Students will have ample opportunity to experiment with control design by implementing their own designs in analog and digital hardware. Examples from field robotics, aircraft, and intelligent-structures will be used for both in-class and hands-on demonstrations. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3380','DFM','Design for Manufacturing','Sabin','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','ENGR 2250','Spring','This is a project-based course that introduces the principles of design for manufacturability and assembly. A variety of manufacturing processes will be covered with a special emphasis on injection molding. Students will design a part for injection molding, design the tool and then mold the parts in the Olin shop. A second project will involve the design or redesign of a product for high-volume manufacturing. There will also be case studies where product designers will visit the class and discuss one of their designs currently in production. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3390','Robotics','Robotics','Barrett, G. Pratt','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','','Spring','This course is taught much like a graduate seminar. Topics include perception, sensors, computer vision, navigation, localization, actuation, manipulation, mobility (e.g., walk, swim, roll, crawl, fly), and intelligence (e.g., control, planning, and mission execution). The course is built around the review and discussion of seminal technical papers in the robotics field with guest lectures both from various Olin faculty and from external leaders in the robotics community. The course will also include a project component to help solidify key concepts. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3410','CompArch','Computer Architecture','Chang','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ICB2','Fall','This course introduces a broad range of computation structures used in computation, from logic gates to specialized (e.g. DSP, cellular automata) as well as general purpose architectures. Design techniques for quantitatively optimizing performance are also taught. Students build a computer from the ground up. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3420','Analog/Digital','Introduction to Analog and Digital Communications','TBA','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ENGR 2410 or Permission of the Instructor','Fall','This course teaches students design techniques for analog and digital communications, including elementary coding and information theory. Topics also include modulation schemes, data compression, error detection and correction, encryption, transmitter and receiver design, and routing protocols. Students build an operative communications link over an unreliable channel. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3425','Analog VLSI','Analog VLSI','Minch','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ENGR 2420','Alt Fall (odd years)','This course will provide an overview of devices available to analog integrated circuit designers in modern complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technologies: resistors, capacitors, metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) transistors, and bipolar junction transistors. It will cover the transistor-level design of linear analog integrated-circuit modules, such as operational amplifiers and operational transconductance amplifiers as well as layout techniques for analog integrated circuits. Students will work in small teams on a series of projects involving the design of analog integrated circuit modules, culminating in the design of an analog system of moderate complexity, such as a filter or a data converter. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3430','Digitial VLSI','Digital VLSI','Chang','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ICB2','Spring','An introduction to digital CMOS design. Students will learn design techniques and lay out their own custom integrated circuit, which will be fabricated by MOSIS. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3440','Sensors','Modern Sensors','Somerville','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ICB2, ENGR 2410','TBA','Modern topics in sensors, including sensor fabrication, physics, signal conditioning, and &ldquo;smart&rdquo; sensors. Students will conduct research on sensor technologies of their choosing, and implement a sensor system of their own design. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3450','SemiconductorDev','Semiconductor Devices','TBA','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','ICB2; SCI 1410 or SCI 3110','TBA','Introduction to semiconductor device fabrication, operation, and design. Emphasis on diodes and transistors, with some exploration of speculative technologies. Students will conduct a project of their own choosing involving either device characterization or device simulation using modern tools. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3520','FOCS','Foundations of Computer Science','Stein','4 ENGR','4-0-8','MTH 2110','ENGR 2510','Every 3rd Semester (beginning Fall 04)','This course uses applications as vehicles for exploring the formal analytic toolkit of the computer scientist as well as aspects of algorithmic computing and intelligent software design. The course combines elements of automata theory, data structures and algorithms, programming languages, artificial intelligence, information management, and internet programming. Students may optionally enroll only in ENGR 3520; these students will be excused from the programming / project component of the course. Students wishing to register for the full six credit course should register for both ENGR 3520 and ENGR 3520A.'),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3520A','FOCS Project','Foundations of Computer Science Project','Stein','2 ENGR','1-0-5','MTH 2110 and ENGR 3520','ENGR 2510','Every 3rd Semester (beginning Fall 04','Students may optionally enroll only in ENGR 3520; these students will be excused from the programming / project component of the course. Students wishing to register for the full six credit course should register for both ENGR 3520 and ENGR 3520A.'),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3525','Software Systems','Software Systems','Downey','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','','Every 3rd Semester (beginning Spring 05)','An introduction to the design and implementation of system-level software, including operating systems, networks, and databases. Topics include processes and threads, memory and storage management, networking and inter-process communication, scheduling and synchronization. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3530','Synchronization','Synchronization','Downey','2 ENGR','2-2-2','','','Every 3rd Semester (beginning Spring 05)','When multiple programs run at the same time, they can interact in complex ways, yielding unpredictable behavior at best and impenetrable bugs at worst. Synchronization is the process of imposing timing constraints in order to guarantee the correct execution of programs. This class presents a series of synchronization &ldquo;puzzles&rdquo; and gradually develops a set of tools for dealing with even the hairiest synchronization problems. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3540','CompMod','Computational Modeling','Downey','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','ENGR 2510 or equivalent','Every 3 Years (beginning Fall 05)','The availability of cheap computation has created a new way of understanding the world. Along with experiment and theory, computational modeling provides new tools for analysis, explanation and prediction. This class looks at the history of this revolution and the technology that underlies it. We will survey a range of literature, from the skeptical to the exuberant, and make a critical evaluation of this putative paradigm shift. Students will learn the skills of computational modeling, with an emphasis on discrete and stochastic models, and apply them to problems in a range of fields including engineering and the natural and social sciences. Basic programming ability, in any language, is a prerequisite. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3550','Systems + Policy','Computer Systems and Public Policy','TBA','2 AHS + 2 ENGR','4-0-8','','','TBA','How do technical decisions influence human lives? How can engineering solutions change the terms of public policy debate? Through a series of case studies, this course looks at these questions in specific fields where computer technology and public policy intersect. In questions of privacy, security, safety (including public health), pornography, intellectual property and free speech, developments in computer systems technology either raise or offer solutions to significant public policy questions. This course builds ethics and context competencies and breadth in AHS. It also covers topics normally found in classes such as Operating Systems, Databases, Distributed Systems, Cryptography, Web Computing, and other Computer Science offerings. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3600','Topics in BioE','Topics in Bioengineering','Sieminski','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','','Fall','Broadly, bioengineering can be defined as the application of engineering concepts and methods to the solution and study of biological and medical problems. Using a case study approach, this course aims to provide students with a broad understanding of the types of problems bioengineers explore as well as the engineering and biological methods they employ. We will approach topics through seminar-style discussion of current primary articles from the literature. Topics to be covered include tissue engineering, use of microfluidics devices for diagnostics, imaging disease states, and prosthetic limbs. In order to explore a topic of particular interest in more depth, students will also write and orally present a research paper on a topic of their choice. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3610','Biomed Materials','Biomedical Materials','Chachra','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','SCI 1210 and SCI 1410, or Permission of the Instructor','Fall','The body is a harsh environment for synthetic materials; not only is it warm, wet, and salty, but there are enzymes and cells whose function is to identify and destroy anything foreign. Conversely, implanted materials can provoke unexpected responses from biological systems. This course is an overview of biological interactions with materials, with a special emphasis on the role of the in vivo milieu on failure in medical devices. Topics will include coagulation, inflammation, and immune responses to materials, cell-surface interactions, and the mechanical interactions of materials and tissue, together with emerging fields such as drug-delivery and neuron-silicon interfaces. Readings will be drawn primarily from the current literature. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3710','Systems','Systems','Bingham, G. Pratt','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','Completion of other E:SYS requirements or Permission of the Instructor(s)','Fall','This course introduces students to the art and science of interdisciplinary design. Students analyze the process used to develop example products that required expertise in many areas and creativity and trade-off consideration amongst all. Students learn about overarching principles that enable creators of broad interdisciplinary systems to succeed. Students will also work in teams and take on roles as design specialists in a variety of fields. Each team is given the task to design in detail a hypothetical product that can succeed only if interdisciplinary creativity is fostered and trade-offs are made by every team member, as well as the group as a whole. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3810','Structural Biomed','Structural Biomaterials','Chachra','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','SCI 1410 and SCI 1210, or Permission of the Instructor','Fall','How is a blood vessel like a garden hose? Why are seashells strong (and beautiful) even though they are made of chalk? How can your opaque white tendons be made of the same material as your transparent corneas? This course focuses on the materials science of natural tissues, primarily ones that fill structural roles, including bone, teeth, tendon, nacre, and wood, with an emphasis on how they are similar and different to &ldquo;engineering&rdquo; materials. Additional material may include scaffolds for tissue engineering, biomimetic materials and mechanical properties of individual cells. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3820','Failure','Failure Analysis and Prevention','Stolk','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','SCI 1410','Spring','Students will complete projects and case studies to gain practical experience in the analysis of fractured and failed engineering materials and components. The course focus will be on material microstructure and the micromechanisms of fracture, and topics will include failure analysis methodology, mechanisms of failure, fracture classifications, corrosion and environmental factors, fractography, and design for failure prevention. Students will learn advanced materials characterization techniques including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and compositional dot mapping, x-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), optical microscopy, and fracture surface sample preparation. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 3830','Phase Transformations','Phase Transformations in Ceramic and Metallic Systems','Stolk','4 ENGR','4-4-4','','SCI 1410','Fall','How can two brittle ceramics combine to make a toughened structure? How does a machinable steel transform into a high strength cutting tool? What drives solid-state reactions in powdered materials? Since properties of alloys and ceramics are largely determined by intrinsic material properties and microstructure, an understanding of phase transformations is essential for materials design and performance optimization. This course focuses on the thermodynamics and kinetics of phase transformations in the bulk and at interfaces and surfaces of multi-component materials systems. Topics include binary and ternary phase equilibria, atomic mobility, transformation kinetics, nucleation and growth, heterogeneous reactions, surface and interfacial energy, diffusional and diffusionless transformations, phase stability, and microstructural development. Examples and laboratory activities highlight fundamental concepts and reinforce the practical importance of phase transformations in engineering ceramics and alloys. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 4190','SCOPE','Senior COnsulting Program for Engineering (SCOPE))','Staff','4 ENGR','4-0-8','must be a senior','','Fall, Spring','This course is a requirement for all Olin seniors. It incorporates formal, team-based, yearlong engineering projects done in conjunction with 10 to 14 external companies. Each project will be executed by a single student team, supported by a dedicated faculty member, in partnership with one of these companies. Each student team will have between 3 and 8 members from the senior class. Students may conduct advanced research, perform market analysis, develop experimental prototypes, design new products or redesign existing products in the execution of this project. '),
('Olin 07-08','ENGR 4190A','SCOPE','Senior COnsulting Program for Engineering (SCOPE))','Staff','variable 2 or 4','2-0-4','','','Fall, Spring','NOTE: This is a registration option for non-Olin students. This course incorporates formal, team-based, year long engineering projects done in conjunction with 10 to 14 external companies. Each project will be executed by a single student team, supported by a dedicated faculty member, in partnership with one of these companies. Each student team will have between 3 and 8 members from the senior class. Students may conduct advanced research, perform market analysis, develop experimental prototypes, design new products or redesign existing products in the execution of this project. Machine Shop '),
('Olin 07-08','MEC 1000','FMSA','Fundamentals of Machine Shop Operations','Anderson','4 Non Degree (will not meet degree requirements)','6-0-6','','Preference will be given those with prior machining and CAD experience','Fall, Spring','The course focuses on the fundamentals of machine shop operations, the foundations for all classical machining techniques. In addition, we will cover necessary mechanical design elements and CAD techniques to equip you with the skills to help other students. No basics will be skipped! We will cover topics in proper breadth and depth to ensure that you come away with a sound understanding of machine shop safety, bench work, measurement, part layout, machine setup, operation and maintenance. We will also focus on design techniques and drawing creation using SolidWorks. Projects will be assigned to enforce these concepts and also provide many hours of machine time. There will be incentives to entice you to work professionally, learn how to interpret and establish appropriate design requirements and make parts to specification. Additionally you will learn how to inspect parts to ensure they meet specification. Time permitting, there will be field trips to local establishments to expand your horizons. Math '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 2110','Discrete','Discrete Mathematics','Adams','4 MTH','4-0-8','','','Fall','Topics for this course include combinatorics, number theory, graph theory, an emphasis on creative problem solving, and the ability to read and write rigorous proofs. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 2120','LinAlg','Linear Algebra','Moody, Adams, Tilley','2 MTH','2-0-4','','','Fall, Spring','An introduction to the fundamental mathematical techniques and concepts used in solving linear systems of equations. Topics include matrices and vectors, Gaussian elimination, matrix inverses, transposes and factorizations, column, row, and nullspace of a matrix, rank of a matrix, determinants, and eigenvalues and eigenvectors. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 2130','ProbStat','Probability and Statistics','Moody, Adams, Tilley','2 MTH','2-0-4','','','Fall, Spring','An introduction to probability and statistics, with applications to science, engineering, and social science. Topics include discrete and continuous probability distributions; moments; conditional probability; Bayes\' Rule; point and interval estimation; hypothesis testing. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 2140','DiffEQ','Differential Equations','Moody','2 MTH','2-0-4','','ICB2','Fall, Spring','An introduction to the solution techniques of differential equations. Topics include mathematical modeling, solution techniques to linear and nonlinear first-order differential equations, characteristic solutions to linear constant coefficient second-order differential equations, solutions to homogeneous (unforced) and inhomogeneous (forced) second-order linear systems. Applications include modeling of physical systems. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 2160','Math Modeling','Introduction to Mathematical Modeling','Tilley','2 MTH','2-0-4','','MTH 1110','Spring','This course centers on the interdependency of mathematics and on the sciences and engineering. Through this codependency, knowledge of the specific discipline is better understood through the development of a mathematical description and its solution. Often, these descriptions are appropriate over a wide range of disciplines well beyond the original context of the first problem. Over the seven-week session, we look at individual cases in biology, chemistry, physics, fields of engineering and business to see how to formulate a mathematical description, and the techniques used for its solution. The course follows a case-study format, with modeling subjects chosen from the media (for example, the Science Times section of the New York Times). '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 3120','PDEs','Partial Differential Equations','Tilley','4 MTH','4-0-8','','MTH 2120 and MTH 2140','Fall','An introduction to the solution methods of partial differential equations that arise in describing a wide variety of problems in engineering, such as in fluid dynamics, elasticity, electromagnetic wave propagation, and transport phenomena. The course begins with the solution of boundary-value problems in ordinary differential equations (Sturm-Liouville theory), and then develops into the fundamentals of Fourier analysis and the solutions to the heat, wave, and Laplace\'s equations on finite and infinite domains. Additional topics will be addressed at the discretion of the Instructor(s), examples of which include systems of hyperbolic equations, similarity solutions in infinite domains, or a brief introduction to numerical solutions. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 3130','Analysis','Mathematical Analysis','Moody','2 MTH','2-0-4','','ICB2','TBA','An introduction to real analysis; construction of the real number system; metric spaces and metric topology; compactness; connectedness; functions. Emphasis on mathematical rigor, logic, and proof. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 3140','ECCs','Error Control Codes','Adams','2 MTH + 2 ENGR','4-0-8','','MTH 2120 (required), MTH 2110 or another proof-based math class','Spring','Error-control codes are used to detect and correct errors that occur when data are transmitted across a noisy channel. This course provides an introduction to error-control codes, including linear, cyclic, binary, and non-binary codes. Mathematics such as modular arithmetic and introductory ring and field theory will be introduced and used extensively. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 3150','Numerical Methods','Numerical Methods and Scientific Computing','Tilley','4 MTH','4-0-8','','MTH 2120, MTH 2140','Spring','The speed of modern computers has allowed simulation to become a very powerful tool in the design and analysis of systems in science and engineering. This power is easily misused and scientific computing is full of pitfalls. This course introduces students to methods useful for accurately simulating complex systems in the physical sciences and engineering. The first half of the course focuses on iterative techniques for solving algebraic systems, interpolation of functions, and advanced techniques for solutions to ordinary differential equations. The second half of the course focuses on an introduction to solutions to boundary-value problems and solutions to partial differential equations, with the students required to choose an application in science and engineering to solve in detail. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 3160','Complex','Introduction to Complex Variables','Tilley','4 MTH','4-0-8','','ICB2, MTH 2140','Fall','This course provides an introduction to the analysis of functions in the complex plane. Topics include the Cauchy-Riemann equations, conformal mapping, Cauchy-Goursat theorem, Taylor-Laurent series, the residue theorem, Nyquist criterion, continuation of analytic functions, and applications in science and engineering. '),
('Olin 07-08','MTH 3170','Chaos','Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos','Geddes','4 MTH','4-0-8','','MTH 2120, MTH 2140','Spring','This course will focus on the modern theory of dynamical systems including both discrete and continuous processes. The course will emphasize both theory and applications. Theory topics might include, for example, linear and nonlinear stability theory, periodic solutions, bifurcation theory, chaos, and strange attractors. Applications discussed might include, for example, mechanical oscillators and biological oscillators. Science '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 1210','Biology','Principles of Modern Biology (with laboratory)','Donis-Keller, J. Pratt','4 SCI','4-3-5','','','Fall, Spring','This course introduces students to the fundamental aspects of biological science including biochemistry, molecular biology, human molecular genetics, and cellular communication. Students gain experience with contemporary research methods and scientific reasoning through laboratory experiments. The relevance of biology to the environment and health is emphasized. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 1310','Chemistry','Introduction to Chemistry (with laboratory)','TBA','4 SCI','4-3-5','','','Spring','This course introduces students to the fundamental aspects of aqueous and solid state chemistry. Topics include stoichiometry, gas laws, atomic structure and bonding, atomic theory, quantum theory, acid/base chemistry, solubility, electrochemistry, kinetics, thermodynamics, and reaction equilibria. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 1410','MatSci','Materials Science and Solid State Chemistry (with laboratory)','Chachra, Stolk','4 SCI','3-3-6','','','Fall, Spring','This laboratory-based course introduces students to the relationships among structure, processing, properties, and performance of solid state materials including metals, ceramics, polymers, composites, and semiconductors. Topics include atomic structure and bonding, crystallography, diffusion, defects, equilibrium, solubility, phase transformations, and electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties. Students apply materials science principles in laboratory projects that emphasize experimental design and data analysis, examination of material composition and structure, measurement and modification of material properties, and selection of materials for engineering applications. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 2110','BioPhysics','Biological Physics','Zastavker','4 SCI','4-0-8','','ICBI and ICB2','TBA','In this course, we will look at life as one of the many phenomena displayed by the universe in its evolution, and apply the laws of physics to understand these phenomena. In doing so, we will take a &ldquo;reductionist&rdquo; or simplified approach to investigate the big picture; i.e., we will explore basic biophysical mechanisms that make various living organisms and biological assemblies interesting to scientists and useful for engineers. We will aim to achieve an intuitive and a semi-quantitative understanding of physical phenomena ranging from electrosensing (the ability of some animals to sense external electric fields for navigation and the detection of prey and communication) and obesity to biomechanics of athlete performance and scaling theory, which provides us with information about beasts we have never seen, for example, dinosaurs. Based on physical laws, we will examine diseases ranging from the cataract of the eye to the formation of gallstones in gall bladder bile. In order to gain knowledge of these various phenomena, we will systematically investigate the properties of water, Brownian motion, dynamics and physiology of fluids, thermodynamics, biomechanics and bioenergetics, and the electrochemical potential. Although engineers spend their entire careers solving and optimizing various problems, nature has been doing this for much longer; therefore, a deep understanding of biophysical processes in nature can yield unforeseen solutions to countless scientific and engineering problems. In this course, we will learn how to learn from nature. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 2120','BioThermo','Biological Thermodynamics','Zastavker','4 SCI','4-0-8','','ICBI and ICB2','Spring','This course provides an introduction to the study of energy transformations in biological systems as well as thermodynamics and kinetics of structure formation and association of biomolecules. Topics covered include energy and its transformation, the First Law of Thermodynamics, the Second Law of Thermodynamics, Gibbs Free Energy, statistical thermodynamics, binding equilibria and reaction kinetics, and a survey of other interesting areas of biological thermodynamics, particularly the origin of life on Earth. Statistical development of entropy and a more extensive coverage of chemical kinetics and ligand binding to macromolecules will provide students with knowledge of thermodynamics and kinetics that they will be able to apply to biological systems and use for research in scientific and bioengineering fields '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 2130','Modern Physics','Modern Physics','Holt','4 SCI','4-0-8','','ICB2','Fall','Modern Physics is based upon a few fundamental ideas that allow the explanation of phenomena that seem to defy consistency with traditional (Newtonian) physics. The most important of these (in the context of engineering applications) are the principles of quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics. This course will introduce the basic concepts of Modern Physics, with particular application to atoms, molecules and the materials utilized in modern electronics. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 2140','Relativity','Relativity',' Holt','2 SCI','2-0-4','','ICB1','Alt Spring (odd years)','When it was first introduced, Einstein\'s Special Theory of Relativity rocked the foundations of classical physics with a plethora of &ldquo;paradoxes&rdquo; that included twins who could have different biological ages. Like swimming, special relativity can be completely understood without formal physics prerequisites, and this course will be taught from first principles that do not require any specialized physics knowledge. This approach will naturally lead to an introduction of General Relativity, including some characteristics of Black Holes.'),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 2210','Immunology','Immunology','Pratt','4 SCI','4-0-8','','SCI 1210 or equivalent','Fall','Immunology is a relatively new science, and our understanding of our immune system is evolving at a rapid pace. When the immune system functions properly, infectious pathogens and potential cancer cells are destroyed. When our immune system malfunctions, normally harmless microorganisms can cause serious infections, autoimmune diseases or allergies can develop and cancer cells can evade immune surveillance and grow unchecked. In this lecture and discussion-based class, we will investigate the molecular and cellular mechanisms that control our immune responses. Current research in immunology will be emphasized through analysis of primary literature and media articles. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 2320','Orgo','Organic Chemistry (with laboratory)','TBA','4 SCI','4-3-5','','','Fall','An introduction to the fundamentals of organic chemistry with an emphasis on applications in biology, biotechnology, synthetic polymers, and the environment. Topics include structure and bonding in organic compounds; chemical and physical properties of organic molecules and bulk organic materials; reaction mechanisms and kinetics; structure-reactivity relationships; chemical and physical transformations; synthesis of organic molecules; and characterization techniques. It is strongly suggested that students who intend to take SCI 2320 first take Introduction to Chemistry, or an equivalent college level course. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 3120','Solid State','Solid State Physics','Christianson','4 SCI','4-0-8','','SCI 2130','Alt Spring (odd years)','Why do metals conduct heat well while insulators do not? Why is silicon a better semiconductor than diamond, even though they have the same structure? Why is lead a good superconductor at low temperature, while copper is not? We will explore the current understanding of insulators, metals, semiconductors and superconductors through some of the basic tools of solid state physics, and will learn how to apply these tools to the novel materials being developed today. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 3130','Classical Mechanics','Advanced Classical Mechanics','Zastavker','4 SCI','4-0-8','','ICB2, MTH 2120, MTH 2140','Alt Fall (even years)','Classical mechanics revisited with the use of mathematical formulation that makes the &ldquo;old and dusty&rdquo; Newton\'s laws shine in all their beauty. Using differential equations and linear algebra tools, we will venture to look at things only hinted at in introductory physics: variational principles, the two-body problem, motion in accelerated frames, rigid body dynamics, oscillations, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics, continuum mechanics, nonlinear dynamics, and chaos. '),
('Olin 07-08','SCI 3210','Genetics','Molecular Genetics in the Age of Genomics','Donis-Keller','4 SCI','4-0-8','','SCI1210 (Olin); BISC219 (Wellesley); or Permission of the Instructor(s)','Fall','It is now understood that many, if not the majority, of human disorders, including cancers, have an underlying genetic component. In this modern age of healthcare, we are expected to choose amongst an array of therapeutic options for ourselves and for our children rather than respond to specific directives from the medical establishment. In addition, we are called upon as voting citizens to make ethical decisions, e.g. the appropriateness of stem cell cloning. Therefore, it is in the interest of each person to learn more than the fundamentals of biology and genetics in order to make educated choices. In this course we will be concerned with the traditional concepts of human genetics including pedigree analysis, linkage mapping, Mendelian, multi-locus and complex traits, and genetic testing. However, for the most part, the course will view human genetics through a molecular lens. For example, the molecular basis of pathological conditions such as Huntington\'s disease, hypercholesterolemia, Fragile-X and others will be examined in detail, as will gene imprinting and imprinting-related abnormalities (e.g. Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes). Comparative genomics will be applied to the study of heritable traits in humans. The structure, function, and evolution of the sex chromosomes will also receive special attention. Gene therapy, cloning (stem cell, germ line) and the associated ethical issues will be considered in some depth. Students who are interested in bioengineering or medical school should find this course useful as well as those who have a general interest in the human as an organism. ');