INSERT INTO `Courses` (`Source`, `Code`, `Nickname`, `Title`,  `Instructors`, `Credits`, `Hours`, `Corequisites`, `Prerequisites`, `Offered`, `Description`) VALUES 
('Olin Spring 09','AHSE 2199','Sustainability','Special Topics in Arts, Humanities, Social Sciences Environmental Enterprise: Technology, Civilization, and Sustainability','Martello','4 AHSE','4-0-8','','','Spring','Technologies, entrepreneurial ventures, and entire civilizations evolve in response to the opportunities and challenges posed by their environment. Human history provides many examples of the complex, dynamic interaction between humans and their natural surroundings, often mitigated by technologies. This course will survey different environmental issues via a three-step approach. In part one, we will read about different ancient civilizations such as Egypt, Rome, Sumeria, and the Mayans, and investigate how they valued and interacted with their surroundings. In part two we will study American history, including topics on Native American technologies, the conquest of space, environmental protection, and biotechnologies. Part three is an open-ended period of individual or team-based studies of modern technological systems in different nations, with an emphasis upon sustainability and environmental context. Throughout the course we will discuss relevant economic theories, philosophical concepts, ethical frameworks, and literary treatments of the environment. This course will adopt an experimental, student-driven structure and tone reminiscent of the earliest days of Olin. We will sample and test different readings, assignments, classroom strategies, and pedagogical methods, and student groups will have a great degree of flexibility in shaping this experience. You will not only learn about environmental enterprise, but will help improve this course for future Olin students while meeting your own educational and personal goals. You will not have a second chance at this opportunity, so come on aboard. '),
('Olin Spring 09','AHSE 2199A','Saving the World','Special Topics in Arts, Humanities, Social Sciences Saving the World: Ideals, Routes, and Contexts for Effective Change','Lynch','4 AHSE','3-0-9','','','Spring','This course is for students who want to use technical expertise to solve world problems. With flexibility to adapt to student interest and discovery, this course will examine obstacles to "saving the world," and avenues to overcome them--all with the aim of empowering students to act on their ideals. Possible topics to consider include interdisciplinary humanities and social science approaches to globalization, development, health, the environment, and industrialization. The course will begin with discussion of topics such as "What is development?" and "Who has the right to implement change?" Based on student interest, we will consider examples of projects that set out to effect change (e.g., damming of rivers in India, appropriate technology in Africa, tuberculosis treatment in Haiti) to see what works, what does not, and why. By examining case studies of successes and failures, students will have a better sense of how to move forward on their own ideas. The course will strike a balance between learning about issues in other parts of the world and working on a local issue. The course structure will likely include provocative and pertinent readings (e.g., Mountains Beyond Mountains by Tracey Kidder; "The Greater Common Good" by Arundhati Roy) visitors, and short research and hands-on projects. '),
('Olin Spring 09','AHSE 2199B','ScienceWriting','Special Topics in Arts, Humanities, Social Sciences Writing about Science and Technology','Goldoftas','4 AHSE','3-0-9','','','Spring','The creativity inherent in science and engineering and the creative process of writing can come together in rich and compelling ways. In this experimental seminar, we will use writing to probe questions about science, biomedicine, and technology-- questions about their theories, their methods, their influence and institutions, their place in and responsibility to society. As writers, we will investigate and attempt different writing forms, including informal writing, personal essays, technical essays, explanatory essays, and arguments. This class will explore the relationship between technical and non-technical forms of writing. We will also read writing by both scientists and non-scientists on topics that range across the sciences and include policy. This class will appeal to students who like to read and also like to write (or wonder if they do). Possible readings include writing by: Alan Lightman, Oliver Sacks, Stephen Jay Gould, Diane Ackerman, C.P. Snow, Elizabeth Kolbert, Douglas Hofstadter, Michael Specter, Malcolm Gladwell, Berton Roueche, John McPhee, Terry Tempest Williams, E.B. White. '),
('Olin Spring 09','AHSE 2199C','Inconvenient Truths','Special Topics in Arts, Humanities, Social Sciences Social Justice and Social Change: Literature and Films That Speak "Inconvenient" Truths to Power','Argyros','4 AHSE','4-0-8','','','Spring','The world into which you will graduate is rife with social problems: hunger, poverty, pollution, racism, global warming, domestic abuse, AIDS, war, genocide. How do novelists and filmmakers address these problems in aesthetically compelling ways without sounding tediously didactic? Which texts attempt only to outline the scope of the problem? Which imagine potential solutions? Which do both? Which methods are most effective, and why? The course will focus on fictional and non-fictional representations of mid-to-late 20th century and early 21st century social problems. We will pair non-fictional texts with relevant fictional texts to explore both the literary representation of social problems as well as the socio-historical contexts surrounding the problems. The class will be primarily discussion-based with readings, films, analytical essays, oral presentations, and other less conventional assignments. For example, students might choose to do a social activism project where they identify, research, and attempt to solve--or at least outline a plan for solving--a social problem in Needham (e.g., the dearth of affordable housing). Or they might choose to do a creative option, authoring a piece of original short fiction or poetry or creating a short film as a means of representing a social problem of their choice. Some course texts will be determined through consultation with students. One possible example of a fiction/nonfiction pairing is the following, on pollution: Sound Truth and Corporate Myth$: The Legacy of the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill (2005) by Riki Ott & The Shipping News by E. Annie Proulx. '),
('Olin Spring 09','AHSE 3199','Leadership + Ethics','Special Topics in Arts, Humanities, Social Sciences Issues in Leadership and Ethics','Miller, Schlesinger; Bottomly','2 AHSE','2-0-4','students in their final year of their undergraduate program','','Spring','This course examines the intersection of leadership and ethics in business, engineering, and more general contexts. Readings will include material on the definition and history of ethics and morality in the U.S., the definition and development of leadership skills in a professional context, the role of ethics in the professions, and case studies involving the intersection of leadership and ethics. The course will be structured as a seminar, involving guest speakers and interactive case studies. Enrollment will be limited to 8 Babson students, 8 Olin students, and 8 Wellesley students in the final year of their undergraduate program. '),
('Olin Spring 09','ENGR 3499','Wireless Comms','Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering Principles of  Wireless Communications','Govindasamy','4 ENGR','4-0-8','ENGR 3420, familiarity with basic Linear Algebra and Probability','','Spring','This course teaches students the main principles of modern wireless communications systems. Students will learn about the propagation and modeling of wireless signals, communications concepts particularly applicable to wireless channels such as channel coherence, diversity, and outage capacity, multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) channels using multiple antennas, and multi-user communications. Students will be required to do a substantial, simulation or in exceptional cases hardware-based design project.'),
('Olin Spring 09','ENGR 3499A','PoISE','Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering Principles of Intelligent Systems Engineering','Chang, Ravel, Boxer','4 ENGR','4-4-4','ENGR 2210, ENGR 3410, or permission of instructor(s)','','Spring','Many of our global challenges such as life sciences, communications, transportation, energy, and agriculture, are areas in which intelligent systems can make a significant impact. PoISE gives students the opportunity to select complex, multi-technology projects that are both challenging engineering endeavors and can make a meaningful impact on society. PoISE is a projectbased course that will engage students in teams to develop intelligent systems using multiple technologies (FPGA, DSP, embedded CPU, desktop systems). These computing systems may reach out to the real world through sensor networks and/or mechanical systems. Students will be introduced to systematic design approaches, real-world tradeoffs, and platform-based design practices central to today\'s intelligent and embedded systems. The course will also provide a project experience that seeks to bridge students more smoothly from PoE to SCOPE. '),
('Olin Spring 09','ENGR 3499B','DSP','Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering Digital Signal Processing','Dabby','4 ENGR','2-2-8','ENGR 2410','','Spring','Signal processing--the modeling, transformation, and manipulation of signals and their content--underpins virtually all facets of our daily lives due to the coupling of computing and communications in consumer, industrial, and public sector applications. Discrete-time signals, obtained through the periodic sampling of continuous-time signals, and their frequency domain equivalents, can undergo transformation via systems, e.g., filters that are categorized by the duration of their impulse responses. The theory, design, and application of finite-duration impulse response (FIR) and infinite-impulse response (IIR) filters conjoins such fundamental topics as difference equations, the z-transform, stability, frequency response, the fast Fourier transform, windowing, A/D and D/A conversion techniques. Each topic will be introduced by real-world applications, followed by illustrative problems that clarify the underlying theory, and a laboratory practicum offering hands-on experiential learning and opportunities for design. '),
('Olin Spring 09','ENGR 3499C','Analog Filters','Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering Analog Filter Design','Lundberg','4 ENGR','4-4-4','ENGR 2420, or permission of instructor','','Spring','This course covers the design and implementation of continuous-time analog filters, which are essential parts of many modern electronic systems, in a variety of different styles, such as passive filters, active filters, switched-capacitor filters, and OTAC filters. It also covers the design of oscillators. Students will do a project involving the design of a filter or of an oscillator.  '),
('Olin Spring 09','ENGR 3699','Tissue Engr','Special Topics in Bioengineering Tissue Engineering','Sieminski','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','','Spring','Tissue engineering is often defined as growing or regenerating tissues. To grow engineered tissues requires an understanding of the cell and tissue biology as well as understanding of how culture conditions (transport of oxygen and biochemical factors, application of mechanical forces, etc.) affect the growing tissues. This course will begin with an overview of developmental biology and the types of biochemical and biophysical cues cells receive and respond to during development that direct them to form specific tissues, followed by an overview of the larger field of tissue engineering. We will discuss cell source, the use of natural or synthetic biomaterials, development of bioreactors, the use of biochemical supplements, as well as motivations and applications of engineered tissues, from replacement of damaged tissues to models of tissue function. The bulk of this course will be dedicated to the design, implementation, and analysis of experiments with a particular focus on engineering blood vessels. This will be an intensive lab-based course in which groups of students will choose the aspect of blood vessel tissue engineering (e.g. scaffold choice, biochemical culture conditions, mechanical stimulation, functional readouts) they would like to pursue and perform their own experiments and analysis (e.g. biochemical, mechanical, histological). '),
('Olin Spring 09','ENGR 3699A','BioThermo','Special Topics in Bioengineering Biological Thermodynamics for Engineers','Sieminski, Zastavker','4 ENGR','4-0-8','','','Spring','The beauty and depth of this subject cannot be described better than with the words of one of the greatest physicists of the 20th century, Arnold Sommerfeld, "Thermodynamics is a funny subject. The first time you go through it, you don\'t understand it at all. The second time you go through it, you think you understand it, except for one or two points. The third time you go through it, you know you don\'t understand it, but by that time you are so used to the subject, it doesn\'t bother you anymore." In this course we will venture into the depths of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, while concentrating on applications of the abstract concepts to biological, biochemical, and biophysical phenomena and drawing from contemporary bioengineering problems. This course provides an introduction to the study of energy transformations in biological systems as well as thermodynamics and kinetics of structure formation and association of biomolecules. Topics covered include energy and its transformation, the First and Second Law of Thermodynamics, Gibbs Free Energy, statistical thermodynamics, binding equilibria and reaction kinetics, and a survey of other interesting areas of biological thermodynamics, particularly the origin of life on Earth. Topics have relevance to numerous pertinent biological/bioengineering applications including diseases based on phase transitions (e.g., cataract of the eye, Alzheimer\'s disease, etc.), oxygenation of hemoglobin; protein folding, aggregation, and binding; assembly of everything from the phospholipids bilayer to biomaterials; the macroscopic mechanical properties of biomaterials and even cells; creation and operation of devices at the nano- and micro-scales; understanding the basis of mass transport; osmotic pressure relevant to cells and microvascular filtration; receptor-ligand binding; the melting and annealing of DNA. The concepts employed in this course have relevance to students interested in many disciplines, including Bioengineering, Material Science, and Chemistry. '),
('Olin Spring 09','ENGR 3899','Process Engr','Special Topics in Materials Science Process Engineering in Materials Science','Neal','4 ENGR','4-0-8','SCI 1410','','Spring','The Design Nature course focuses on experiencing the engineering design process. This course will be about the engineering design of a process. \'Process\' being the systematic method for reproducibly producing all or part of a product. Process Engineer is more a job description (search "process engineer" in Monster.com for details) than an engineering discipline; process engineers might be mechanical, chemical, electrical, or materials engineers by training. In any case, all can design and develop processes more effectively when they integrate materials science knowledge and principles into their work. This course will be a team-based project-oriented experience that integrates materials science concepts with systematic experiment design methodologies and applied statistical analysis. Experimentation plays an important role in all phases of product realization, and here we will focus on the process development and improvement part of that. Since statistical validation of results is critical to the systematic enhancement of knowledge and expertise that is at the heart of process engineering, one of the goals of this course will be that students make thoughtful and intelligent use of statistical parameters in their decision making. To that end, we will study the origins and content of these parameters. It is not necessary that students have completed or are concurrently enrolled in probability & statistics, MTH 2130. Nonetheless, the course is quite relevant. Consequently, plans and expectations for individual students in this course will be customized to accommodate prior knowledge in this area. Student project teams will use the statistically based "Design of Experiments" methodology to develop and optimize processes through experimentation. '),
('Olin Spring 09','SCI 1121','E+M','Electricity and Magnetism','Somerville, Zastavker','4 SCI','4-0-8','','MTH 1120 Electricity and magnetism, including electric charges, forces, and fields, Gauss\'s Law, potential, electrostatic energy and capacitors, magnetic fields and energy, mutual and self induction, Ampere\'s Law, Maxwell\'s Equations and electromagnetic waves.','Spring','Section 01, Zastavker: A Theoretical Approach Electromagnetism is rightly considered one of the great unification triumphs of physics. In this theoretically-oriented course, we will examine the beauty of the Maxwell equations primarily using analytical approaches. Topics include electric charges, forces, and fields, Gauss\'s Law, potential, electrostatic energy and capacitors, magnetic fields and energy, mutual and self induction, Ampere\'s Law, Maxwell\'s Equations, acoustic and electromagnetic waves, polarization, interference and diffraction. Section 02, Somerville: A Modeling and Simulation Approach Electromagnetic forces are responsible for an amazingly large fraction of the physical phenomena we observe on a daily basis. Unfortunately, many "real" electromagnetism problems are extremely difficult to solve analytically, so making progress often requires use of computational tools. In this course we will take a modeling and simulation approach to learning the fundamentals of electromagnetism and waves. The course will include both an analytical problem-solving component to reinforce fundamental physical ideas, as well as a number of open-ended modeling and simulation projects in which students will apply these ideas to real-world systems (e.g., microphones, ion traps, aurora borealis, mag-lev trains, musical instruments). Scientific writing will be emphasized. '),
('Olin Spring 09','SCI 1121A','E+M + Lab','Electricity and Magnetism (with laboratory)','Christianson','4 SCI','3-3-6','','MTH 1120 Electricity and magnetism, including electric charges, forces, and fields, Gauss\'s Law, potential, electrostatic energy and capacitors, magnetic fields and energy, mutual and self induction, Ampere\'s Law, Maxwell\'s Equations and electromagnetic waves.','Spring','This course includes a laboratory component. Spring 2009 Section We are surrounded by all kinds of cool devices that function using the basic principles of electric and magnetic fields. In this class we will study the physics of electric and magnetic fields and forces in the context of modern applications. In addition to a thorough overview of topics in electricity and magnetism, we will embark on a laboratory exploration of devices that function using the basic principles of electric and magnetic fields. For the primary class project, you will pick a device or class of devices, and, through analytical calculation, simulation and hands-on demonstration learn to explain thoroughly and quantitatively how your device operates. Through the middle of the term, we will complement this with an extended hands-on project to measure the speed of light using an electric circuit, which will demonstrate some of the basic principles involved in device physics. ');